Improvements to payment methods integration docs (#3890)
woocommerce/woocommerce-gutenberg-products-block: docs/extensibility/payment-method-integration.md

The checkout block has an API interface for payment methods to integrate that consists of both a server side and client side implementation.

## Table of Contents <!-- omit in toc -->

- [Client Side integration](#client-side-integration)
  - [Express payment methods - `registerExpressPaymentMethod( options )`](#express-payment-methods---registerexpresspaymentmethod-options-)
  - [Payment Methods - `registerPaymentMethod( options )`](#payment-methods---registerpaymentmethod-options-)
  - [Props Fed to Payment Method Nodes](#props-fed-to-payment-method-nodes)
- [Server Side Integration](#server-side-integration)
  - [Processing Payment](#processing-payment)
  - [Registering Assets](#registering-assets)
  - [Hooking into the Checkout processing by the Store API.](#hooking-into-the-checkout-processing-by-the-store-api)
  - [Putting it all together](#putting-it-all-together)

## Client Side integration

> The client side integration consists of an API for registering both _express_ payment methods (those that consist of a one button payment process initiated by the shopper such as Stripe ApplePay or GooglePay), and payment methods such as _cheque_, PayPal Standard, or Stripe Credit Card.

Reviewer: Looks like you may want some serial commas for the express methods you mention here:

```suggestion
The client side integration consists of an API for registering both _express_ payment methods (those that consist of a one-button payment process initiated by the shopper such as Stripe, ApplePay, or GooglePay), and payment methods such as _cheque_, PayPal Standard, or Stripe Credit Card.
```

In both cases, the client side integration is done using registration methods exposed on the `blocks-registry` API. You can access this via the `wc` global in a WooCommerce environment (`wc.wcBlocksRegistry`).

> > Note: In your build process, you could do something similar to what is done in the blocks repository which [aliases this API as an external on `@woocommerce/blocks-registry`](https://github.com/woocommerce/woocommerce-gutenberg-products-block/blob/e089ae17043fa525e8397d605f0f470959f2ae95/bin/webpack-helpers.js#L16-L35).

Reviewer: It could be worth mentioning the [WC Dependency Extraction Webpack Plugin](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@woocommerce/dependency-extraction-webpack-plugin) as an option here too.  I think it accounts for the wcBlocksRegistry as part of its default settings.

Author: I thought about that, but in this case the Payment Methods API explicitly takes care of this via how it actually registers the registered payment method asset handle as a [dependency of the blocks assets](https://github.com/woocommerce/woocommerce-gutenberg-products-block/blob/0d432032706987ee5d17659850491f559c845499/src/Payments/Api.php#L64-L69) . 

I'm wary about introducing too much into this doc about how developers would register their scripts without it straying into more detailed tutorial territory.

Author: I ended up adding this in c5b4b09 :)

```js
const options = {

>   name: 'my_payment_method',

Reviewer 2: Non-blocking, we could include the "details" content below inline in code comments within this example so the description is right next to the example. Might make it easier to follow.

Author: Ya I thought about that, the difficulty is that the details linking out won't work (because code blocks stop the link parsing in md).

Here's some more details on the configuration options:

-   `name` (required): This should be a unique string (wise to try to pick something unique for your gateway that wouldn't be used by another implementation) that is used as the identifier for the gateway client side. If `paymentMethodId` is not provided, `name` is used for `paymentMethodId` as well.

> -   `content` (required): This should be a React node that will output in the express payment method area when the block is rendered in the frontend. It will be cloned in the rendering process. When cloned, this React node will receive props from the payment method interface to checkout that will allow your component to interact with checkout data (more on this later).

Reviewer: I have a bit of trouble following the wording here.  Are you saying that the cloned node receives props from the interface between the payment method and the checkout block?  Or are you saying that the node receives props from the payment method interface, which it needs in order to interact with checkout data during the checkout process?

Author: The latter. Your question indicates this can be worded better - I'll give another go at it :)

-   `edit` (required): This should be a React node that will be output in the express payment method area when the block is rendered in the editor. It will be cloned in the rendering process. When cloned, this React node will receive props from the payment method interface to checkout (but they will contain preview data).

> -   `canMakePayment` (required): A callback to determine whether the payment method should be available as an option for the shopper. The function will be passed an object containing data about the current order. Return a boolean value - true if payment method is available for use. If your gateway needs to perform async initialization to determine availability, you can return a promise (resolving to boolean). This allows a payment method to be hidden based on the cart, e.g. if the cart has physical/shippable products (example: [`Cash on delivery`](https://github.com/woocommerce/woocommerce-gutenberg-products-block/blob/e089ae17043fa525e8397d605f0f470959f2ae95/assets/js/payment-method-extensions/payment-methods/cod/index.js#L48-L70)); or for payment methods to control whether they are available depending on other conditions. **Keep in mind this function could be invoked multiple times in the lifecycle of the checkout and thus any expensive logic in the callback provided on this property should be memoized.**

Reviewer: This tip about memoization is :sparkles:!  :smiley:

> -   `paymentMethodId`: This is the only optional configuration object. The value of this property is what will accompany the checkout processing request to the server and used to identify what payment method gateway class to load for processing the payment (if the shopper selected the gateway). So for instance if this is `stripe`, then `WC_Gateway_Stripe::process_payment` will be invoked for processing the payment.

Reviewer: I think these existing docs might be missing a word:
```suggestion
-   `paymentMethodId`: This is the only optional configuration object. The value of this property is what will accompany the checkout processing request to the server and is used to identify what payment method gateway class to load for processing the payment (if the shopper selected the gateway). So for instance if this is `stripe`, then `WC_Gateway_Stripe::process_payment` will be invoked for processing the payment.
```

The options you feed the configuration instance are the same as those for express payment methods with the following additions:

> -   `label`: This should be a React node that will be used to output the label for the tab in the payment methods are. For example it might be `<strong>Credit/Debit Cart</strong>` or you might output images.

Reviewer: I think there might be a missing word here:

```suggestion
-   `label`: This should be a React node that will be used to output the label for the option where the payment methods are. For example it might be `<strong>Credit/Debit Cart</strong>` or you might output images.
```

-   `shippingData`: This object contains all shipping related data (outside of status) - `shippingRates`, `shippingRatesLoading`, `selectedRates`, `setSelectedRates`, `isSelectingRate`, `shippingAddress`, `setShippingAddress`, and `needsShipping`.
-   `billing`: This object contains everything related to billing - `billingData`, `cartTotal`, `currency`, `cartTotalItems`, `displayPricesIncludingTax`, `appliedCoupons`, `customerId`
-   `eventRegistration`: This object contains all the checkout event emitter registration functions. These are functions the payment method can register observers on to interact with various points in the checkout flow (see [this doc](./checkout-flow-and-events.md) for more info). The following properties are available - `onCheckoutBeforeProcessing`, `onCheckoutAfterProcessingWithSuccess`, `onCheckoutAfterProcessingWithError`, `onPaymentProcessing`, `onShippingRateSuccess`, `onShippingRateFail`, `onShippingRateSelectSuccess`, `onShippingRateSelectFail`

> -   `components`: The properties on this object are exposed components that can be implemented by your payment method for various common interface elements used by payment methods. Currently the available components on this property are: `ValidationInputError` (a container for holding validation errors which typically you'll include after any inputs), [`PaymentMethodLabel`](https://github.com/woocommerce/woocommerce-gutenberg-products-block/blob/e089ae17043fa525e8397d605f0f470959f2ae95/assets/js/payment-method-extensions/payment-methods/paypal/index.js#L37-L40) (use this component for the payment method label, including an optional icon)

Reviewer: It might be worth creating bullets for these components to improve readability:

```suggestion
-   `components`: The properties on this object are exposed components that can be implemented by your payment method for various common interface elements used by payment methods. Currently the available components on this property are:
  - `ValidationInputError` — a container for holding validation errors which typically you'll include after any inputs
  - [`PaymentMethodLabel`](https://github.com/woocommerce/woocommerce-gutenberg-products-block/blob/e089ae17043fa525e8397d605f0f470959f2ae95/assets/js/payment-method-extensions/payment-methods/paypal/index.js#L37-L40) — use this component for the payment method label, including an optional icon
```

I wasn't sure about the context of the link for the `PaymentMethodLabel` component.  It looks like it leads to an example of how it's used.  It might be worth linking to the [component's definition](https://github.com/woocommerce/woocommerce-gutenberg-products-block/blob/f3b2b53435ffbc9ac49215846bad08ce74c7124b/assets/js/base/components/cart-checkout/payment-method-label?/index.js) in the name instead and then separately link to the example with text along the lines of "You can see an example of this component in the PayPal payment method integration.

(👆 and ditto for the `ValidationInputError` component too)  :smiley:

-   `setExpressPaymentError`: This function receives a string and allows express payment methods to set an error notice for the express payment area on demand. This can be necessary because some express payment method processing might happen outside of checkout events.

## Server Side Integration

### Processing Payment

> Currently, the checkout block has legacy handling for payment processing (by converting incoming `payment_data` provided by the client side payment method to `$_POST` and calling the payment gateway's `process_payment` function ). So unless your payment method hooks into the core checkout `process_checkout` function in any way, this will take care of processing your payment for you server side if you already have a WooCommerce Payment method extension integrated with the existing shortcode checkout flow.

Reviewer: I found the wording a bit challenging to follow here.  What about something like this:

```suggestion
The checkout block currently has legacy handling for payment processing.  It converts incoming `payment_data` provided by the client-side payment method to `$_POST` and calls the payment gateway's `process_payment` function.  If you already have a WooCommerce Payment method extension integrated with the existing shortcode checkout flow, the checkout block's legacy handling will take care of processing your payment for you on the server side.  However, If your payment method hooks into the core checkout `process_checkout` function in any way, you will need to account for this behavior and make appropriate adjustments.  (See the section below about hooking into the checkout process via the Store API.)
```

### Registering Assets

> Since implementing the correct loading of your client side asset registration is tricky with some dependencies on how related assets load in the request, there is an API for ensuring you can register any assets and data to pass along to your client side payment method from the server.

Reviewer: I had a bit of trouble understanding the wording here.  Are you saying that the abstract class (and interface) below are available to help payment method developers make sure that their client-side scripts get registered/enqueued/served correctly alongside related scripts for WC core, Blocks, etc.?

Author: Yes, basically what happens is the payment method registers their handle and the payment method registry surfaces these handles to be registered as dependencies on the actual block assets. The reason this is needed because while the `WP_Scripts` dependency handling works well for indicating what scripts need to load _before_ my JS file, there's no built in way for me to indicate that my script must load _before_ another registered script in another extension. 

I see how I can reword this a bit so I'm going to give a go.

-   set the status to return for the payment method (one of `success`, `failure`, `pending`, `error`).
-   set a redirect url.
-   set any additional payment details (in case you need to return something for your client to further process with).

> ### Putting it all together

Reviewer: I :heart: the way you've broken this section down into an explanation of steps followed by an example of the result.
